doc: Thread: created types page, moved sed vs ssed (#11410)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/protocols/thread/device_types.rst

.. _thread_device_types:

Thread device types
###################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Thread devices can be either Full Thread Devices (FTD) or Minimal Thread Devices (MTD).
The devices are divided based on their ability to exist in a network without a parent, determined by whether the device maintains a routing table (doesn't need a parent) or not (needs a parent).

> FTDs are the devices that maintain a routing table, while MTDs do not, forwarding all their messages to a parent instead.

Reviewer: FTDs may also be in a "Child" state in the Thread network - forwarding all their messages to parent. I guess this sentence might be differently understood.

Reviewer 2: I leave it up to @pjasinski990 if we want to mention this child state and where.

Another type of Thread device classification is based on the device's ability to route messages:

* Routers can route messages, and they can function as parents to other Thread devices.
* End Devices cannot route messages, and they cannot function as parents.

Based on this classification, FTDs can be either Routers or End Devices, while MTDs can only be End Devices.

For additional information about Thread device types, see the documentation for `Device Types on OpenThread portal`_.

.. _thread_types_ftd:

Full Thread Devices
*******************

> In order to maintain the routing table, FTDs keep their radio on at all times.

Reviewer: Main reason why FTDs (but in fact also MTDs (like MED or SED during attachment, scanning)) - is that they need to be ready to receive messages asynchronously (from other devices). Maintaining routing table is a separate topic.

An important difference between FTDs and MTDs is that FTDs subscribe to special "all-routers" multicast addresses (``ff02::2`` and ``ff03::2``, see `IPv6 multicast addressing`_).

> Because of these reasons, they typically consume more power than MTDs.

Reviewer: The subscription to the address won't directly result in higher power consumption. I would not mixed these two things.

It is true that the due to keeping the radio on all the time, device consumes more power, and needs to be mains powered.

Full Thread Devices can be further divided into three categories:

* Router
* Full End Device (FED)
* Router Eligible End Device (REED)

.. list-table:: Full Thread Device categories
   :widths: 15 10 10 15
   :header-rows: 1

   * -
     - Router
     - Full End Device
     - Router Eligible End Device
   * - Maintains a routing table
     - Yes
     - Yes
     - Yes
   * - Routes messages
     - Yes
     - No

>      - When working as a Router

Reviewer: This is a bit misleading. When REED operates as Router then it is called Router. Basically you cannot build the Thread device to operate as "Router" or "REED" only.. device will be in one of these states depending on the network condition.

So here i would put: No

Reviewer: In general, maybe it would be worth to change this section a bit. 

From roles perspective FTD can be either:
 - REED / Router / Leader  (any of these depending on the network topology)
 - FED (which effectively is always a child)
 
 By reading this section, i have an impression that it is possible to configure device to be a REED or Router (Active Router).

   * - Can extend the network
     - Yes
     - No

>      - When working as a Router

Reviewer: This one is also controversial like one above.

Routers can be regarded as the backbone of a Thread network.
They maintain the routing table and forward messages to other devices.
Routers, unlike End Devices, can also be used to extend the network range and a Router is required for a Minimal End Device to join the network.

> The maximum number of Routers in a single Thread network is 32.

Reviewer: "active Router"

FEDs maintain a routing table, but they can't route messages.

> This means they don't require a parent (Router) to function, but they cannot become parents themselves.

Reviewer: This is not correct. FEDs operate as End Devices and require parent (Router) to function.

REEDs maintain a routing table and, unlike FEDs, they can become Routers if needed.

> If a REED is the only device in range of an End Device trying to join the network, it will promote itself to a Router (see `Joining an existing Thread network`_ in the OpenThread documentation for more information).

Reviewer: nit: maybe "it will proactively request promotion to a Router role"   (REED may only request Leader for promotion)

> Conversely, when a Router has no children it can downgrade itself to a REED.

Reviewer: It's true, but also simplification. The Thread specification provides a few other possibilities when Routers should downgrade to REED role. Basically it's all about the network topology, so maybe:

"Depending on the network topology conditions, Router may downgrade itself to a REED role (e.g. when does not have any children and sufficient number of routers are already in the network)."

.. _thread_types_mtd:

Minimal Thread Devices
**********************

Minimal Thread Devices (MTDs) are devices that do not maintain a routing table and are typically low-power devices that are not always on.
They can only be End Devices, and they always need a parent to function.
They forward all their messages to their parent.

Minimal Thread Devices can be further divided into three categories:

* Minimal End Device (MED)
* Sleepy End Device (SED)
* Synchronized Sleepy End Device (SSED)

.. list-table:: Minimal Thread Device categories
   :widths: 15 10 10 15
   :header-rows: 1

   * -
     - Minimal End Device
     - Sleepy End Device
     - Synchronized Sleepy End Device
   * - Maintains a routing table
     - No
     - No
     - No

>    * - Radio on

Reviewer: Maybe "Radio characteristic"
"Always enabled"
"Periodically enabled"

     - Always
     - Periodically
     - Periodically
   * - New messages
     - Parent immediately forwards the messages
     - The SED polls for new messages when it wakes up

>      - Parent forwards the messages during designated transmission window

Reviewer: ... or when SSED explicitly polls data.

   * - No new messages
     - No data transmission
     - Parent indicates no pending messages

>      - No data transmission

Reviewer: I think this is true. However :) in order to keep synchronization, we need to send messages from time to time (to respect CSL timeout).

Update: I see you have mentioned that in some more detailed documentation.

MEDs are the most basic MTDs, and their radio is always on.

> They don't keep a routing table, but otherwise operate like :ref:`FEDs <thread_types_ftd>`.

Reviewer: This is not fully acurate. The difference between MTD and FTD is not about the routing table only. It's about certain functionalities/capabilites which FTD has, but MTD has not, like ability to resolve IPv6 addresses, handling address registration, maintaining routing table, maintaining links with neighbors and so on.

SEDs try to limit their power consumption by sleeping most of the time, waking up periodically to poll for messages from their parent.
After waking up, they send a data request to their parent.
If the parent has any pending messages, it will send them to the SED.
Otherwise, the parent will send a response indicating no pending messages.

> 

Reviewer: I think it would be worth to mention how SED and SSEDs transmit messages (not data polls) to parent e.g. that it may happen any time, since Routers have their radio enabled all the time.

SSEDs operate similarly to Sleepy End Devices, but they are synchronized with their parent.

> They wake up at the same time as their parent, eliminating the need for polling for messages.

Reviewer: What does it mean that the parent "wakes up"? Parent never goes to sleep. It may may rather send the non-polled frame only in designated transmission window.

> If the parent has messages for the SSED, it sends them during the designated transmission window.

Reviewer: In practice, often there might be more frames that are buffered on Router side. In such case the first frame is received in designated transmission window, but the rest are "pulled" using regular Data Polls (exactly like SED).

.. _thread_device_types:

Thread device types
###################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

> Thread devices can be either Full Thread Devices (FTD) or Minimal End Devices (MTD).

Reviewer 3: should me Minimal Thread Devices (MTD), mb

Author: Good catch.

.. _thread_types_ftd:

Full Thread Devices
*******************

In order to maintain the routing table, FTDs keep their radio on at all times.
An important difference between FTDs and MTDs is that FTDs subscribe to special "all-routers" multicast addresses (``ff02::2`` and ``ff03::2``, see `IPv6 multicast addressing`_).
Because of these reasons, they typically consume more power than MTDs.

Full Thread Devices can be further divided into three categories:

* Router
* Router Eligible End Device (REED)
* Full End Device (FED)

Routers can be regarded as the backbone of a Thread network.
They maintain the routing table and forward messages to other devices.
A router is required for a Minimal End Device to join the network.
Routers, unlike End Devices, can also be used to extend the network range.

Both Routers and REEDs have routing capabilities, while FEDs do not.
REEDs function similar to FEDs, but they can become Routers if needed.
If a REED is the only device in range of an End Device trying to join the network it will promote itself to a Router (see `Joining an existing Thread network`_ in the OpenThread documentation for more information).

> Conversely, when a Router has no children it can downgrade itself to a REED.

Reviewer 3: I am now thinking we could add a sentence informing that the limit of routers is 32 for a single network (enforced by 5-bit router id encoding in RLOC16)

Author: Added mention of maximum number, but left the bit about RLOC16 out.

An important difference between FTDs and MTDs is that FTDs subscribe to special "all-routers" multicast addresses (``ff02::2`` and ``ff03::2``, see `IPv6 multicast addressing`_).
Because of these reasons, they typically consume more power than MTDs.

Full Thread Devices can be further divided into three categories:

* Router
* Router Eligible End Device (REED)
* Full End Device (FED)

Routers can be regarded as the backbone of a Thread network.
They maintain the routing table and forward messages to other devices.
A router is required for a Minimal End Device to join the network.
Routers, unlike End Devices, can also be used to extend the network range.
The maximum number of routers in a single Thread network is 32.

Both Routers and REEDs have routing capabilities, while FEDs do not.
REEDs function similar to FEDs, but they can become Routers if needed.
If a REED is the only device in range of an End Device trying to join the network it will promote itself to a Router (see `Joining an existing Thread network`_ in the OpenThread documentation for more information).
Conversely, when a Router has no children it can downgrade itself to a REED.

> FEDs don't require a parent to function, but they can't become parents (Routers) themselves.

Author: I rearranged the information. Will try to mull a table that makes sense.

They can only be End Devices, and they always need a parent to function.
They forward all their messages to their parent.

Minimal Thread Devices can be further divided into three categories:

* Minimal End Device (MED)
* Sleepy End Device (SED)
* Synchronized Sleepy End Device (SSED)

MEDs are the most basic MTDs, and their radio is always on.
They operate like FEDs, but they don't keep a routing table.

SEDs try to limit their power consumption by sleeping most of the time, waking up periodically to poll for messages from their parent.
After waking up, they send a data request to their parent.
If the parent has any pending messages, it will send them to the SED.
Otherwise, the parent will send a response indicating no pending messages.

SSEDs operate similarly to Sleepy End Devices, but they are synchronized with their parent.
They wake up at the same time as their parent, eliminating the need for polling for messages.
If the parent has messages for the SSED, it sends them during the designated transmission window and the SSED allows the transmission to finish if radio activity is detected during the transmission window.

> Conversely, if there is no radio activity during the specified transmission window duration (indicating the parent has no messages for the SSED), the SSED returns to sleep.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Conversely, if there is no radio activity during the specified duration of the transmission window, this indicates that the parent has no messages for the SSED and the SSED returns to sleep.
```

> This synchronization results in lower power consumption, primarily because the SSED doesn't need to poll for messages, keeping transmission windows short.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The SSED synchronization results in lower power consumption compared with the SED, primarily because the SSED doesn't need to poll for messages, keeping transmission windows short.
```

> This synchronization results in lower power consumption, primarily because the SSED doesn't need to poll for messages, keeping transmission windows short.

Reviewer 2: Also here I would suggest a table to present the differences.
